---
title: Week 11 - Final touches
layout: post
description: null
image: null
open_blog: true
suburl: "2019/08/13/week_11.html"
---

So, the second last week of the project is over and we have decided to improve on the work we have done so far in the last few days. Read below to know more.

In this week, I worked on, [#17146](https://github.com/sympy/sympy/pull/17146) concered with symbolic `Range`, [#17387](https://github.com/sympy/sympy/pull/17387) related to assumptions of dependence among random variables, [#17336](https://github.com/sympy/sympy/pull/17336) which fixed the bug in `Q.hermitian` the one I told you about in my previous post, and [#17306](https://github.com/sympy/sympy/pull/17306), implementing the matrices with random expressions.

In fact, the last two PRs are merged. Now, coming on to symbolic `Range`, I have completed the testing of all the methods except `slicing` feature of `__getitem__`, which I will do in this week. Regarding, the bug in `Q.hermitian`, well, my code at first, was giving incorrect results due to overriding problems in the logic. Francesco, helped me correct them and it's finally in. The major part of the week was devoted to assumptions of dependence. I did some study from Wikipedia, and implemented the class `DependentPSpace`. I have kept the class static because it will handle queries of the type, `density(X + Y, Eq(Covariance(X, Y), S(1)/2)` which from my point of view doesn't require creation of a probability space object.

Coming on to the plan for the last week, we have decided that no new PRs will be opened and focus will be towards completing the already open PRs, so that we have most of our work completed. Francesco has also suggested to test the newly introduced classes with the ones of Wolfram Alpha, so that there are no inconsistencies.